---
title: "SODBeans: A debugger for people with vision impairments"
date: 2022-08-25
categories:
  - accessibility
  - HCI
  - programming
  - vision impairment
abstract: "My notes on the paper SODBeans introducing a debugger for those with vision impairments."
---

One big change over the last year is my slow move to working on
projects that could have more of an impact on the world than just
working on stuff to scratch my love for solving puzzles. In addition,
I've been wanting to work on stuff that encompasses more of my
interests as well!  So I've been starting some new projects, and one
of them is looking at new ways to help programmers with vision
impairments, well, program!  

There is surprising little on this, especially when it comes to
helping general industry programmers rather than just helping students
who are learning to program when they have vision impairments.  My
hope is to not only make it easier and more *enjoyable* for
vision-impaired programmers, but to provide a framework for
programming language creators to be able to add such accessibility
features without a lot of overhead.  It's a big dream!

My student, Sala, and I are reading a bunch of papers on this topic,
and I thought, why not throw my notes in a post?  So today I'm reading
the paper:

```
A. Stefik, A. Haywood, S. Mansoor, B. Dunda and D. Garcia, "SODBeans," 2009 IEEE 17th International Conference on Program Comprehension, 2009, pp. 293-294, doi: 10.1109/ICPC.2009.5090064.
```

# Introduction

They make some really nice comments on the difficulty and the lack of support

- The main commercially available programming environments largely
  focus on visual stimuli to represent information to the programmer.
  Thus, programmers with vision impairments must rely on screen
  readers to interact with the environments.
  
- It might seem like accessibility APIs are sufficient for the those
  with vision impairments, but this is not the case. In fact,
  commercial institutions little or no financial incentive for
  creating effect interfaces for the vision impaired.  Thus, most APIs
  are created as form of charity or national accessibility standards.
  
- Making effective environments for the vision impaired is extremely
  hard.
  
- When navigating without sight *logical context* (e.g., knowing that
  the current item being explored is connected to another item) is
  more meaninful than *spatial context*.  This is known as the *"Where
  am I?" problem*.  Screen readers do not support this type of
  exploration.
  
  I've also realized this in my research, and have some ideas on how
  we can make progress on this problem using some newish PL ideas.
  
- Screen reader companies are small companies, and yet they have to
  try and support every type of application a person might use.  This
  is super hard!  So they generally concentrate on the most popular
  applications.
  
# Programming Blind

Then they go into the issues and needs of a programmer with vision
impairments:

- Braille displays exist, but are uncommon in the vision-impaired
  programming community.
  
- Programmers develop custom screen-reader scripts for development
  environments to read code using auditory cues. 
  
- A programmer may want to hear descriptions of a number of different
  contexts:
  
  - For syntax errors, they may want to hear every character of a line
    of code.
    
  - After a syntax error is spoken, they may want to jump to the
    location of the error.
    
  - The programmer may want to have a summary of the information
    around a given location in the code.
    
  - The programmer might want to determine the behavior of the program
    at runtime, and thus, a number of auditory cues would need to be
    available to the programmer to explore the running program.
    
    - Like reading iterations and quantitative information during
      debugging.
      
  - The programmer might want meta-auditory cues.  These are cues
    about the program that are not represented by the data in a file.
    
    - Contextual information like the structure of the parse tree;
      e.g., nesting of control blocks or type information surrounding
      a hole.
      
    - Exploring the lines of a program during execution; e.g., moving
      forward and backward during debugging.
      
  - They give several examples of bad accessibility support among
    common programming environments.
    
    - Visual Studio says "Graphic 53" plus the current line of code
      during execution of a program.  Furthermore, it always says
      "F11". These are supper unhelpful.

# SODBeans

SODBeans is an extension of NetBeans with that extends NetBeans with
the Sonified Omniscient Debugger (SOD).  This is a framework
consisting of a C-compiler, custom debugging architecture, sound
libraries, and a sophisticated system for auditory cue design.

The problem with this section is that it doesn't go into any more
detail nor gives any citations backing up what SODBeans can do and how
it's designed.  I managed to find another paper by the same authors:

```
Stefik, Andreas & Hundhausen, Christopher & Patterson, Robert. 
"The Sonified Omniscient Debugger: A Program Execution and Debugging Environment for Non-Sighted Programmers Built from the Ground up"
```

I'm hoping this one sheds more light on the inner-workings of SOD.
