---
title: "Movement Correction and Remote Coaching: A New Research Program"
date: 2022-12-07
categories:
  - HCI
  - sports-HCI
  - fitness
  - remote coaching
abstract: "How does the correction of fitness movements methodology transfer to remote coaching?"
toc: false 
---

I've been working with my CrossFit coach remotely for my entire time
as an athlete.  She provides me with both my training program and
feedback on technique and form.  This style of coaching has been
gaining in popularity over the course of the last three years. The
COVID pandemic revealed that remote training can link athletes with
great coaches and athletes can progress in their sport quickly.  As a
result of this more and more coaches in CrossFit are offering remote
coaching options.  Some notable examples are Hard Work Pays Off,
six-times CrossFit Games champion Matt Fraser's company, and PRVN, the
company behind seven-times CrossFit Games champion Tia-Clair Toomey.
The dynamic between coach and athlete is quite different in remote
coaching than in traditional face-to-face coaching.  A Notable
difference is the use of technology, in the form of mobile
applications and video, as a bridge between coach and athlete.

I believe that this boom in remote training of CrossFit athletes is a
perfect setting for HCI research into remote training of athletes,
tracking athlete performance, and the use of technology in sports.  In
this post I discuss the differences in how a coach and an athlete
identify errors in movements and offer corrections when working
together remotely compared to face-to-face coaching.  I will offer some
anecdotal insights and research questions both of which I'm preparing
a study to investigate.

# Correction and Remote Coaching

There are two main goals of a coach-athlete relationship:

- Maintain strengths within the athlete's performance.
- Identify and strengthen weaknesses within the athlete's performance.

These will allow the athlete to progress in their sport over time.
This is accomplished through:

- personalized training, 
- feedback, and
- tracking and assessment of past performance.

While there are a lot of interesting things to consider in each of the
previous categories we will concentrate on the second, feedback, in
this post.

Physical training research has introduced the following feedback
process between coach and athlete:

- **correction** : the central process of collaboratively assessing a
  physical activity.  

Correction as a process is the pairing of an identification of a
weakness in an athletes movement during a physical activity and the
correction made by the athlete to strengthen their movement.  There is
also a notion of **repair**, but we leave this to a future post.

<div style="background-color: #F0F0F0; padding: 10pt;">
In the literature I've read, they speak of errors and fixes to these
errors, but in my experience as an athlete most errors do not have
simple fixes, but a fix is really a spectrum where the athlete
strengthens their movement over time.  Thus, I speak of weaknesses and
strengthening these weaknesses.
</div>

An example correction might be: The coach identifies that their
athlete is not engaging their scapular muscles, the weakness, during
their strict pull ups.  The athlete strengthens their pull ups by
engaging their scapular, but they are not able to take full advantage
due to their t-spine being tight.  So while their pull up is now
stronger, they need to continue to develop their mobility and strength
of their scapular muscles to continue to strengthen their pull
ups. This shows that there is a spectrum of fixes captured by the
notion of continually strengthening a movement. 

Corrections can be initiated by identification of a weakness by either
the coach or the athlete, and a change in the athletes movement to
strengthen the identified weakness can be initiated by either the
coach or the athlete.  In traditional face-to-face coaching the
identification of a weakness is most often done by the coach, and
the coach and athlete collaborate on how to strengthen the weakness.

<div style="background-color: #F0F0F0; padding: 10pt;"> Remotely
coached athletes have to take a greater role in the identification of
weaknesses, because the coach is not present watching the athlete as
they do their movements. Identification consists of the athlete
recording their movements, watching their video to identify any
corrections that may need to be done right away, and then sending
their video to the coach for further assessment which may lead to
further corrections.  The coach most likely will not respond to the
video until after the days training, and thus, there can be a delay in
corrections.  This need to self correct and delay in expert correction
is important when it comes to the athletes progression, because the
delay of expert correction prevents the athlete from strengthening
their weaknesses quickly and so self correction becomes important to
maintain steady progression.

This also implies that athlete lead corrections become more frequent,
and it also highlights the prominent role of the camera in the
coach-athlete dynamic.  The camera becomes an extension of both the
athlete and the coach.  To the athlete its a vehicle of self-correction
and their connection to the their coach.  In comparison, to the coach,
the camera is the way to reach out and touch the athlete, it is their
window into the training room and a means to assessment.  Finally, in
traditional face-to-face coaching the coach can literally touch the
athlete and correct them, but this is not possible in remote coaching,
and so, the coach may create videos themselves to send to the athlete
to be able to model correct technique.  In this way, the camera really
is an extension of the collaboration. </div>

# Research Agenda

As I’ve reiterated too many times, technology plays a major role in
remote training. In particular: 

- **Video** allows the coach/athlete to communicate, assess, and
  correct movement.

- **Digital journal** allows the coach/athlete to record, assess, and
  communicate past and future training performance.

Existing tools are largely mobile applications augmented with email
and text messaging.  They do not offer much improvement in making
remote coaching closer to the traditional in-person coaching.  We
believe this can be changed. The following are the research focuses of
our overall project:

- enhance video recording and feedback by allowing markup on videos,
  side-by-side comparisons, and quick editing features;
  
- create a virtual training journal capable of easily conducting
  training programming, analysis, and feedback; and

- integrate video communication and storage into the digital journal.

Hitting these goals will require studying visualizations, tracking of
fitness data, UI design, user research, and a number of contextual
design studies.

I’m in the process of finalizing an IRB package for a contextual
design study looking at the processes remote coaches, traditional
coaches, and athletes use to track, asses, and program fitness
training.

I’ve also begun prototyping the foundation of a mobile training
journal app with basic functionality, but whose design will be
conducted after our initial study. I’m really looking forward to the
next year of research on this topic.

# Literature

I did a literature search on correction and remote training, but there
were no results that I could find.  Here is the list of related work
in traditional face-to-face coaching:

1. Jacquelyn Allen-Collinson and websupport@bath.ac.uk. 2006. Running together: some ethnomethodological considerations. Ethnographic Studies 8: 17–29.

2. Bryn Evans. 2017. Sports coaching as action-in-context: using ethnomethodological conversation analysis to understand the coaching process. Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health 9, 1: 111–132. https://doi.org/10.1080/2159676X.2016.1246473

3. Bryn Evans and Edward Reynolds. 2016. The Organization of Corrective Demonstrations Using Embodied Action in Sports Coaching Feedback. Symbolic Interaction 39, 4: 525–556. https://doi.org/10.1002/symb.255

4. Guy Faulkner and Sara-Jane Finlay. 2002. It’s Not What You Say, It’s the Way You Say It! Conversation Analysis: A Discursive Methodology for Sport, Exercise, and Physical Education. Quest 54, 1: 49–66. https://doi.org/10.1080/00336297.2002.10491766

5. Brian T. Gearity and Joseph P. Mills. 2012. Discipline and punish in the weight room. Sports Coaching Review 1, 2: 124–134. https://doi.org/10.1080/21640629.2012.746049

6. Charles Goodwin and John Heritage. 1990. Conversation Analysis. Annual Review of Anthropology 19: 283–307.

7. Leelo Keevallik. 2010. Bodily Quoting in Dance Correction. Research on Language and Social Interaction 43, 4: 401–426. https://doi.org/10.1080/08351813.2010.518065

8. Anthony J. Liddicoat. 2007. An Introduction to Conversation Analysis. A&C Black.

9. Douglas Macbeth. 2004. The Relevance of Repair for Classroom Correction. Language in Society 33, 5: 703–

10. Cathrin Martin and Fritjof Sahlström. 2010. Learning as Longitudinal Interactional Change: From Other-Repair to Self-Repair in Physiotherapy Treatment. Discourse Processes 47, 8: 668–697. https://doi.org/10.1080/01638531003628965

