---
layout: blog
title: "Linear Dependent Type Theory: A Folklore Confirmation"
date: 2018-09-07
categories:
 - linear logic
 - dependent type theory
---

<div id="divCheckbox" style="display: none;">
$$\newcommand{\cat}[1]{\mathcal{#1}}
\newcommand{\func}[1]{\mathsf{#1}}
\newcommand{\iso}[0]{\mathsf{iso}}
\newcommand{\H}[0]{\func{H}}
\newcommand{\J}[0]{\func{J}}
\newcommand{\catop}[1]{\cat{#1}^{\mathsf{op}}}
\newcommand{\Hom}[3]{\mathsf{Hom}_{\cat{#1}}(#2,#3)}
\newcommand{\limp}[0]{\multimap}
\newcommand{\colimp}[0]{\multimapdotinv}
\newcommand{\dial}[1]{\mathsf{Dial_{#1}}(\mathsf{Sets^{op}})}
\newcommand{\dialSets}[1]{\mathsf{Dial_{#1}}(\mathsf{Sets})}
\newcommand{\dcSets}[1]{\mathsf{DC_{#1}}(\mathsf{Sets})}
\newcommand{\sets}[0]{\mathsf{Sets}}
\newcommand{\obj}[1]{\mathsf{Obj}(#1)}
\newcommand{\mor}[1]{\mathsf{Mor(#1)}}
\newcommand{\id}[0]{\mathsf{id}}
\newcommand{\lett}[0]{\mathsf{let}\,}
\newcommand{\inn}[0]{\,\mathsf{in}\,}
\newcommand{\cur}[1]{\mathsf{cur}(#1)}
\newcommand{\curi}[1]{\mathsf{cur}^{-1}(#1)}
\newcommand{\mto}[0]{\to}
\newcommand{\m}[0]{\mathsf{m}}
\newcommand{\w}[0]{\mathsf{w}}
\newcommand{\c}[0]{\mathsf{c}}
$$
</div>

Almost exactly one year ago [Dominic Orchard](https://www.cs.kent.ac.uk/people/staff/dao7/) and I have joined forces to make progress on new functional programming languages firmly founded in substructural type systems.  We are calling our project the [Granule Project](NEED A DOMAIN NAME).  I am not going to introduce the Granule Project, because Dominic has done a great job in his [post]().  In fact, this post is part of a series describing all of our work.  For the list of all the posts in the series please see this [table of contents]().  We are using this series to spread the word about our work pre-publication.

My role in the project is to study the combination of graded modal types and dependent type theory.  This combination allows us to solve a long standing open question of how to define substructural dependent type theory.  However, before I can move on to explaining these new goodies like graded modal types I first need to argue why defining substructural dependent type theories is hard.  This is exactly what this post attempts to do.

In this poist we will stick to linear logic, and discuss what we call *Linear Depenendent Type Theory (LDTT)*, but what do we mean by this?  We define LDTT to be a dependent type theory where *every* variable -- including type variables -- must be used exactly once.  So for example, if one has a closed lambda-expression

$$\emptyset \vdash \lambda x.t : (x : A) \limp B$$

then $$x$$ must be used exactly once in $$t$$ and exactly once in $$B$$.  If we have an open expression like

$$\Gamma_1,x : A,\Gamma_2 \vdash t : B$$

then $$x$$ must appear only once in $$\Gamma_2$$, or appear only once in $$t$$, or appear only once in $$B$$, but it must appear in one of those.